Draft 03 PR (#58)
uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft: draft-peabody-dispatch-new-uuid-format-03.txt

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

2.  Background

>    A lot of things have changed in the time since UUIDs were originally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Many things have changed in the time since UUIDs were originally
```

   values in distributed systems without requiring synchronization makes
   them a good candidate for use as a database key in such environments.

   Previous UUID versions 1 through 5 suffer from at least the following

>    shortcomings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  UUID versions 1 through 5 lack certain desirable characteristics in some circumstances:
```

   1.  Non-time-ordered UUID versions such as UUIDv4 have poor database
       index locality.  Meaning new values created in succession are not
       close to each other in the index and thus require inserts to be
       performed at random locations.  The negative performance effects
       of which on common structures used for this (B-tree and its
       variants) can be dramatic.

   2.  Introspection/parsing is required to order by time sequence (as
       opposed to being able to peform a simple byte-by-byte
       comparision.

   3.  UUIDv1 utilizes a non-standard timestamp epoch derived from the
       Gregorian Calendar.  More specifically, the Coordinated Universal
       Time (UTC) as a count of 100-nanosecond intervals since

>        00:00:00.00, 15 October 1582.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   3.  The 100-nanosecond, Gregorian epoch used in UUIDv1 timestamps is uncommon and difficult to represent accurately using a standard number format such as IEEE 754 .
```

   4.  Privacy and network security issues arise from using a MAC
       address in the node field of Version 1 UUIDs.  Exposed MAC
       addresses can be used as an attack surface to locate machines and
       reveal various other information about such machines (minimally

>        manufacturer, potentially other details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       manufacturer, potentially other details).  With the advent of virtual machines and containers, MAC address uniqueness is no longer guaranteed.
```

   5.  Many implementation details are specified in [RFC4122] but some
       of the decisions made involve tradeoffs that are neither possible
       to specify for all applications nor necessary to produce
       interoperable implementations.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   6.  The previous specification also does not distinguish between the
       requirements for generation of a UUID versus an application which
       simply stores one, which are different.

   7.  The only specified text format is unnecessarily verbose at 225%

>        the length of the raw bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   7.  The hex-octet-and-hyphen string notation results in strings is not particularly compact.
```

   8.  A fixed length restricts the options of implementations to choose
       between having shorter (and e.g. values easier for humans to read
       and use) and less unique values, or having longer yet more unique

>        values.

Reviewer: I find this troubling, especially the concept of shorter UUIDs.  Such ids effectively short circuit the fundamental premise of this entire RFC, which is to insure uniqueness.

   Due to the shortcomings of UUIDv1 and UUIDv4, many widely distributed
   database applications and large application vendors have sought to
   solve the problem of creating a better time-based, sortable unique

>    identifier for use as a database key.  This has lead to numerous

Reviewer: Minor phrasing nit, below, but overall this paragraph has a rather jarring sound to it. 
 This is the "closer" paragraph where we justify why we're making whatever changes follow, but this doesn't do that.  The db locality problem in databases doesn't warrant shorter UUID lengths, different string encodings, or different variant/version layout.

Whether this is simply an issue in phrasing or a more fundamental problem with how we've allowed "feature creep" here, I won't comment on here. :-)

```suggestion
   Due to the aforementioned issues, many widely distributed
   database applications and large application vendors have sought to
   solve the problem of creating a better time-based, sortable unique
   identifier for use as a database key.  This has lead to numerous
```

   5.   [ShardingID] by Instagram
   6.   [KSUID] by Segment
   7.   [Elasticflake] by P.  Pearcy
   8.   [FlakeID] by T.  Pawlak
   9.   [Sonyflake] by Sony
   10.  [orderedUuid] by IT.  Cabrera
   11.  [COMBGUID] by R.  Tallent
   12.  [SID] by A.  Chilton
   13.  [pushID] by Google
   14.  [XID] by O.  Poitrey
   15.  [ObjectID] by MongoDB
   16.  [CUID] by E.  Elliott

   An inspection of these implementations and the issues described above
   has led to this document which attempts to adapt UUIDs to address
   these issues.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   Note that there are similarities between [ULID] and UUID version 7 as
   described in this document.  In any case, the point here is to
   formalize new UUID formats in a way that is backward compatible with
   UUID and takes into account all of the concerns mentioned herein.

3.  Summary of Changes

   The following UUIDs are hereby introduced:

   1.  UUID version 6: A re-ordering of UUID version 1 so it is sortable
       as an opaque sequence of bytes.  Easy to implement given an

>        existing UUIDv1 implementation.

Reviewer: Can/should we describe v6 as being specifically intended for use with legacy v1 IDs, only?  I.e. that readers SHOULD prefer v7 when there's no v1 UUID from which to derive a v6 UUID.

   2.  UUID version 7: A new format which is simpler, time-ordered and
       specified in a way that separates UUID generation requirements

>        from generation recommendations from storage requirements.

Reviewer: Reads a bit awkward.  Also, it's not clear how generation and storage requirements are actually being separated here so maybe just omit that bit.
```suggestion
   2.  UUID version 7: A timestamp-based format that allows for a variety of clock precision counter resolution.
```

      and UUIDv8 in various languages by many GitHub community members.
      (https://github.com/uuid6/prototypes)

4.  UUID Version 6

4.1.  Format

   UUID version 6 aims to be the easiest new version to implement by
   using the same information from a UUID version 1 and changing the

>    order of the timestamp value.

Reviewer: "aims" is passive.  "easiest" is subjective.

Also, consider emphasizing the point about being primarily intended for use with legacy v1 UUIDs here?
```suggestion
   UUID version 6 is a field-compatible version of v1, reordered for improved DB locality.  It is expected that v6 UUIDs will primarily be used in contexts where there are existing v1 UUIDs.  Systems that do not have involve legacy v1 UUIDs should consider using v7 UUIDs instead.
```

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   Instead of splitting the timestamp into the low, mid and high
   sections from UUIDv1, UUIDv6 changes this sequence so the timestamp

>    is stored from most to least significant.  I.e.  Given a 60-bit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   sections from UUIDv1, UUIDv6 changes this sequence so timestamp bytes
   are stored from most to least significant.  I.e.  Given a 60-bit
```

   time_top:
      The most significant 48 bits of the 60-bit timestamp.  Occupies
      bits 0 through 47 (octets 0-5).

   ver:
      The version value, set to 6 (0110b).  Occupies bits 48 through 51
      (top 4 bits of octet 6).

   time_bottom:
      The remaining 12 bits of the 60-bit timestamp.  Occupies bits 52
      through 63 (bottom 4 bits of octet 6 and octets 7-8)

   var:
      The 2 bit UUID variant (10)

   remaining_bytes bytes:
      The remaining 62 Bits of the UUID as defined by [RFC4122],
      Section 4.1.6 or [RFC4122], Section 4.5

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   In the specification for UUIDv1, the clock sequence [RFC4122],
   Section 4.1.5 and node value [RFC4122], Section 4.1.6 have specific
   behaviors prescribed for them.  For UUIDv6, such requirements are
   relaxed.  Implementations may choose to continue to using the
   previous behavior, or refer to the sections on (TODO, links)
   Monotonicity and Collision Resistance and implement appropriate
   behavior described therein.

> 4.2.  Creating a UUIDv6 Value

Reviewer: Maybe follow the convention set by RFC4122 where sample implementations are put in appendices at the end of the document.  ([for example](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122#appendix-A))

   This section details a function in C which converts from a UUID
   version 1 to version 6:

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdint.h>
   #include <inttypes.h>
   #include <arpa/inet.h>
   #include <uuid/uuid.h>

   /* Converts UUID version 1 to version 6 in place. */
   void uuidv1tov6(uuid_t u) {

     uint64_t ut;
     unsigned char *up = (unsigned char *)u;

     // load ut with the first 64 bits of the UUID
     ut = ((uint64_t)ntohl(*((uint32_t*)up))) << 32;
     ut |= ((uint64_t)ntohl(*((uint32_t*)&up[4])));

     // dance the bit-shift...
     ut =
       ((ut >> 32) & 0x0FFF) | // 12 least significant bits
       (0x6000) | // version number
       ((ut >> 28) & 0x0000000FFFFF0000) | // next 20 bits
       ((ut << 20) & 0x000FFFF000000000) | // next 16 bits
       (ut << 52); // 12 most significant bits

     // store back in UUID
     *((uint32_t*)up) = htonl((uint32_t)(ut >> 32));
     *((uint32_t*)&up[4]) = htonl((uint32_t)(ut));

   }

                       Figure 2: UUIDv6 Function in C

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

> 4.3.  Example of a UUIDv6 Value

Reviewer: Move to appendix?

   TODO: Show 1x UUIDv6 examples (and their respective UUIDv1
   counterpart?

   ------------------------------------
   field           bits    value
   -----------------------------------
   time_top          48    <Example>
   ver                4    0110b
   time_bottom       12    <Example>
   var                2    01b
   remaining_bytes   62    <Example>
   -----------------------------------
   total            128
   ------------------------------------
   final: <example_uuidv6_from_table_inputs>

                    Figure 3: UUIDv6 Example Test Vector

5.  UUID Version 7

5.1.  Format

>    UUID version 7 is a time-ordered value intended to be simpler and
>    more flexible than version 6.

Reviewer: "simpler" is subjective
```suggestion
   UUID version 7 features a time-ordered value field that allows for flexible clock precision and counter resolution, as well as improved entropy characteristics over versions 1 or 6.
```

   |          unix_ts_ms           |            rand_a             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    var_ver    |            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                   Figure 4: UUIDv7 Field and Bit Layout

   unix_ts_ms:
      48-bit big-endian unsigned number of milliseconds since midnight 1
      January 1970 UTC.  Follows the same rules as a UNIX timestamp,
      i.e. does not include leap seconds.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   rand_a:
      16-bits pseudo-random data to provide uniquness as per
      Section 7.10

   var_ver:
      The 8-bit combined variant and version field with the value 0xE7
      as defined by Section 7.2.

   rand_b:
      The final 56-bits of pseudo-random data to provide uniquness as
      per Section 7.10 and Section 7.7.

> 5.2.  Creating a UUIDv7 Value

Reviewer: Appendix blah blah

TODO: some C code here showing how to generate, including option for counter

                    Figure 5: UUIDv7 Function in C

5.3.  Example of a UUIDv7 Value

   TODO: Show a few UUIDv7 values with the field/value breakdown

   -------------------------------
   field      bits    value
   -------------------------------
   unix_ts_ms   48    <Example>
   rand_a       16    <Example>
   var_ver       8    0xE7
   rand_b       56    <Example>
   -------------------------------
   total        128
   -------------------------------
   final: <example_uuidv7_from_table_inputs>

                    Figure 6: UUIDv7 Example Test Vector

6.  UUID Version 8

6.1.  Format

>    UUID version 8 provides a backward compatible UUID format which
>    otherwise has no restrictions on format except that the variant bits
>    and version bits be set to 0xE8 in octet 9 as defined in Section 7.2.

Reviewer: Be explicit about the fact this is intended for  experimental and/or vendor-specific formats?
```suggestion
   UUID version 8 provides an RFC-compatible format for experimental or vendor-specific use cases.  The only requirement is that the variant and version bits be set as defined in Section 7.2 (version set to 0100b).
   
  Version 8 UUID uniqueness will be implementation-specific and should not be assumed.
```

   document for each version.  Storing UUIDs requires only that the
   exact value is recorded.  Everything else is an implementation detail
   and up to the implementor to decide what is appropriate for a given
   implementation.  That being said, various relevant factors are
   covered below to help guide an implementor through the different
   tradeoffs among differing UUID implementations.

7.1.  Storing UUIDs, Opacity

   UUIDs SHOULD be treated as opaque values unless there is a good
   reason to do otherwise (i.e. implementations SHOULD NOT examine the
   bits in a UUID to whatever extent is possible.)

   As such, any storage mechanism capable of storing a series of bytes
   (minimum 9, maximum 64) is a valid storage mechanism for UUIDs.  If
   an implementation chooses to only support 128-bit UUIDs, then
   anything that can store 16 bytes is valid.  Implementations which
   store UUIDs are not required or advised to have an understanding of
   their contents.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

>    For applications which go against this advice and must inspect UUIDs,
>    extracting the version number can be done by first examining the
>    variant field at bits 64 and 65 for the values 1 and 0 respectively,
>    and then extract the version from bits 48 through 51.  UUID versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Where necessary, the version number may be extracted by first verifying the
   variant field bits 64 and 65 contain 1 and 0 respectively,
   and then extract the version from bits 48 through 51.  UUID versions
```

   N:  Variant (1110 [E])

   M:  Version (0111 [7] or 1000 [8])

   While this specification makes use of the unused variant bits of 111
   defined in [RFC4122], Section 4.1.1; the placement of the version
   within the same octet as the variant leaves room for a future
   variant.  As such the table below details the previous variant, new
   variant and new variant that is reserved for future definition.

    +------+------+------+------+------------------------------------+
    | Msb0 | Msb1 | Msb2 | Msb3 | Description                        |
    +------+------+------+------+------------------------------------+
    | 1    | 0    | x    | x    | The variant specified by [RFC4122] |
    +------+------+------+------+------------------------------------+
    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 0    | The variant specified in this      |
    |      |      |      |      | document.                          |
    +------+------+------+------+------------------------------------+
    | 1    | 1    | 1    | 1    | Reserved for future definition.    |
    +------+------+------+------+------------------------------------+

           Table 1: UUID Variant defined by this specification

> 7.3.  Length (Variable, 128-bit Default)

Reviewer: Variable length UUIDs strikes me as a huge can of worms that I would dearly love to avoid.  Both for specification and implementation.  It raises *so* many questions.  For example:

- If a UUID is larger than 16 bytes, how is it padded?
- ... what are the extra bits / bytes used for?
- ... can a UUID have a fractional-byte length? (e.g. 173 bits)  ... how would that be parsed?
- What does the string-form of a non-standard length UUID look like?   a.k.a "Where do the hyphens go?"
- What does it mean for a uuid to have length < 16 bytes?
- As an implementor, when scanning a UUID field, how do I know how many bytes/bits to read?  I.e. how does a UUID indicate it's length?  This is important, if for no other reason than to know where the next field in the data starts.
- What does variable field length imply for other, existing RFC versions?  "Why can't *those* now be longer?"

I know the answers to some/most of these seem obvious to us, but these are the sorts of questions that new readers of this spec will be asking, and we haven't (yet?) done a sufficient job in answering them here.

And, again, I'm not convinced of the value proposition.  I continue to feel that other lengths are better left for a different spec.

Reviewer 2: I have another question about encoding:

* how to encode a UUID to base-32?
* should I encode using 40-bit groups, from left to right, as in [RFC-4648, section 6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-6)?
* or should I code using a generic algorithm that performs [modulo division](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/10318/the-math-behind-converting-from-any-base-to-any-base-no-cross-base)?

The RFC-4648 algorithm is much faster than the modulus division algorithm, but it produces a completely different result. To produce the same result with RFC-4648 algorithm, it is necessary to pad the low-order bits with zeros, so that the resulting bit sequence is multiple of 40.

There are actually 3 questions  :)

Reviewer 3: As discussed by @bradleypeabody, I will open a discussion thread to hammer this out. In the meantime I will commit a version of Draft 03 that drops this topic until we can nail down the specifics.

#59 opened

   any length from 9 to 64 bytes (TODO: decide if this is the right
   range - less than 9 bytes and we lose the variant/version, and 64 is
   arbitrary but we should have some upper limit in case it has an
   impact on physical storage requirements)

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   Variable length is optional and implementations MAY opt-out and only
   support 128-bits.

   Recommendation is for implementations to start defining UUID as an
   array of bytes (length + pointer or whatever language mechanism)
   instead of a fixed set of 16 bytes.

   TODO: I think we need a table in here that gives bit/byte lengths and
   collision probability.  So someone can look down the numbers and pick
   the one that is right for their app.

7.4.  Text Format

   The existing hex and dash format (8-4-4-4-12) is still valid.
   Shorter or longer values just omit or add hex characters (TODO: give
   some examples at different lengths)

   Crockford base32 is allowed also (TODO: briefly summarize reasons -
   shorter, more compact if UUIDs are stored as text, crockford

>    version's benefits vs).

Reviewer: I don't consider http://www.crockford.com/base32.html to be a rigorous enough standard to warrant inclusion here.  For example, I have no idea how this bit of prose is meant to be interpreted:

> If the bit-length of the number to be encoded is not a multiple of 5 bits, then zero-extend the number to make its bit-length a multiple of 5.

Even if the spec weren't ambiguous, this makes parsing and validation of UUID strings significantly more difficult, especially where the use of regexes is concerned.  The ability to insert an arbitrary number of hyphens, and substitute 1's, 0's, i's, l's, and o's however you see fit leads means the same value could be represented as `0011rk4` or `--oO-iIRK--4`.

This just doesn't meet my bar for value:complexity tradeoff.  We should omit this.

Reviewer 2: I have another question about encoding:

* how to encode a UUID to base-32?
* should I encode using 40-bit groups, from left to right, as in [RFC-4648, section 6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-6)?
* or should I code using a generic algorithm that performs [modulo division](https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/10318/the-math-behind-converting-from-any-base-to-any-base-no-cross-base)?

The RFC-4648 algorithm is much faster than the modulus division algorithm, but it produces a completely different result. To produce the same result with modulus division, it is necessary to pad the least significant bits with zeros.

There are actually 3 questions :)

Reviewer 4: The RFC-4648 algorithm will be the only way to go if the variable length fields are to be added at the bottom, though that is different than ULID's encoding.

But anyway Crockford base32's tolerance over 0o1il breaks ASCII-sortability of the textual representations. This fact effectively requires all the implementations to canonicalize input before sorting, which considerably deteriorates the usefulness of the new spec. Lexicographical sortability should be the first priority of the new spec, so the letter/digit errors should be strictly prohibited at the spec level. IMO, Crockford base32's human-friendliness is a sort of area that should be covered by check digit algorithms.

Plus, though Base 32 is convenient in that it is case-insensitive and url-safe, it is still redundant compared to Base 64 schemes. Further research on needs and use cases will be necessary before standardization.

Reviewer 2: Yes. The RFC-4648 algorithm is the only way for variable length UUID.

As for the Crockford alphabet, months ago I thought it would be a good choice. But now I'm not sure.

Reviewer 2: Another thing we haven't thought about yet is what the URN representation for base 32 encoded UUIDs will look like. 

`urn:uuid:01BX5ZZKBKACTAV9WEVGEMMVRY`

Would this format above be correct?

Reviewer 2: One more thing: the Crockford alphabet is encoded with UPPER CASE, just like the alphabet in RFC-4648.

Will the base 32 UUIDs be uppercase encoded as well? Either way this needs to be present in the draft.

Reviewer 2: Yet another: the [formula](https://github.com/f4b6a3/uuid-creator/blob/dbc54155c6cb2893eff99876b75ead20382fe331/src/main/java/com/github/f4b6a3/uuid/codec/base/BaseN.java#L134) to calculate the size of a variable-length UUID in base-32 must be included in the draft. We know that a base 32 encoded 128-bit UUID has 26 characters (without padding), but we will have to calculate this for each UUID length.

Reviewer 2: The check character at the end of a Crockford-encoded UUID could be a problem with the variable-length UUID. Is the last character part of the UUID or just a check symbol?

I'm commenting as soon as I remember and before I forget. Sorry. :)

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't say a UUID should have a check digit, but at the same time I wouldn't think a UUID needs to be as human-error-tolerant as Crockford base 32. The best textual encoding should be determined based on real needs, but I don't clearly see such needs as of now. That is my concern.

We should also be aware of other attempts like https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-taylor-uuid-ncname/ . Or we can just fall back on a approach like https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-multiformats-multibase/ .

Reviewer: This thread is getting a bit long in the tooth. Should we move discussion to #2 ?

Reviewer 3: Thanks group, I re-opened that thread.
Edit: in the meantime I am going to commit a draft 03 without the this topic until we can nail down the specifics.

   values are near each other in the index and can much more easily be
   clustered together for better performance.  Real-world differences vs
   random data can be quite large.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

7.6.  Timestamp Granularity

   Implementations SHOULD use the current timestamp to provide values
   that are time-ordered and continually increasing.

   It's okay to "fuzz" timestamp values here for various reasons
   (security, clock inaccuracy, etc.), there is no absolute guarantee
   about how close the clock value needs to be to actual time - that's
   implementation-specific.

   TODO: Give some examples

7.7.  Monotonicity and Counters

   (the old clock seq, can be optionally implemented, doesn't help that
   muc in distributed environment)

   Within UUIDv7 it can be said that "each value returned is greater
   than the last" due to the embedded counter.

   Implementations SHOULD return monotonic values where it is feasible.
   E.g. in a single library, effort should be made to return successive
   values that count up.

>    Implemetnations can achieve monotonic sequencing with an emedded

Reviewer: Two typos.  One line. 😆 

```suggestion
   Implementations can achieve monotonic sequencing with an embedded
```

   sequence counter, by waiting for the next clock tick, or by checking
   that in case of next value has same timestamp see that the random
   bytes part is greater than prior value and generate new random bytes

>    and check again.  TODO: Describe trade offs of these approaches, but

Reviewer: awkward phrasing

   simple as: "if next UUID is >= last, generate again until timestamp
   or random bytes provide a value that is higher" - maybe consider a
   max limit for cases where the system clock rolls back).

   The monotonicity properties of an particular UUID generator SHOULD
   stated in it's documentation.

7.8.  Global and Local Uniqueness

   Global uniquess is impossible to guarantee without shared knowledge.
   I.e. two systems cannot come up with two numbers completely
   independently without some possibility of collission UNLESS they
   agree on some mechanism to ensure uniqueness ahead of time (e.g. your
   numbers always end with ... and mine always end with... or whatever)

Peabody & Davis          Expires 20 August 2022                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   RFC4122 tried to use MAC address as shared knowledge - it sort of
   worked but had problems (security issues with exposing MAC addresses
   defined in Section 9, guarantee of actual global uniqueness is
   questionable)

   TODO: mention that "shared knowledge" is intentionally not required

>    for implementation and this is part of the design, but...

Reviewer: 🎉

   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |          unix_ts_ms           |            rand_a             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    var_ver    |            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

Peabody & Davis          Expires 21 August 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

                   Figure 2: UUIDv7 Field and Bit Layout

   unix_ts_ms:
      48 bit big-endian unsigned number of milliseconds since midnight 1
      January 1970 UTC.  Follows the same rules as a UNIX timestamp,
      i.e. does not include leap seconds.

   rand_a:
      16 bits pseudo-random data to provide uniqueness as per
      Section 5.10

   var_ver:
      The 8 bit combined variant and version field with the value 0xE7
      as defined by Section 5.2.

   rand_b:
      The final 56 bits of pseudo-random data to provide uniqueness as

>       per Section 5.10 and Section 5.7.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps, it's rand_a that relates to Section 5.7, isn't it? The monotonic counter should be placed right after the timestamp so the generated IDs can be lexicographically sortable.

Just for clarification, do you have any intention (e.g. limiting counter size or ensuring minimum per-ID entropy) in allocating two rand_[ab] fields separately with the specific size for each? I was wondering if it is allowed to utilize a counter larger than 16 bits.

Reviewer: > I'm okay to just get it over it and go with a milliseconds timestamp

At the risk of horsing a dead beat...

Is there a reason `unix_ts_ms` is 48 bits instead of 42 or 44?  44 bits would suffice for dates to year 2527.  I only mention this because the current verbiage ("big endian") means the first 6 high-order bits won't be used for nearly a century.  The first 4 for 500 years. 

Seems like a waste.  Maybe go with a 44 bit field, instead?
```
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                           unix_ts_ms                          |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |      unix_ts_ms       |                  rand_a               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    var_ver    |            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

```

Reviewer: > The monotonic counter should be placed right after the timestamp

After all the debate and discussion we've had about counters, would it be fair to say the consensus here is that counters are too problematic to be canonically addressed by this specification?   Summarizing why ...

* Counter uniqueness and monotonicity is limited in scope, typically to the host process.  But that scope is often smaller than the scope for which uniqueness is required. (Think many clients generating IDs, all connected to a central DB.)
* Counters have to accommodate worst case scenarios.  But such scenarios are relatively rare, resulting in fields that are largely static and fail to contribute to uniqueness as a result.  This is true of both statically and dynamically sized counter fields.
* Counter implementations tend to be complicated, requiring users to reason about UUID creation rates and counter rollover faults.

If this is the case, I'd suggest we just take a big fat "pass" on counters as far as the spec goes.  Don't even mention them in version 7.  And, for §5.7, limit ourselves to verbiage along these lines:

_"Sub-millisecond monotonicity may be provided at the discretion of implementors by utilizing the high-order bits of `rand_a` (and `rand_b`, if necessary) for an appropriate monotonic value.  For example, this may be a count of microseconds or nanoseconds, or of UUIDs generated, since the start of the current time interval._

_However, such solutions should be approached with caution.  It is the consensus of the authors that such approaches are damaging to the _universal_ uniqueness guarantee this specification aspires to."_

Reviewer 4: I am leaning towards including a clear guidance because counters need to be handled with caution.

BTW does a counter damage to the universal uniqueness? This is actually my long-time question. Assume a 16-bit field and two applications each of which generates 256 IDs in a millisecond. If the 16-bit field is filled with random bits, the probability of collision approximates to `1 - exp(-(512^2) / (2 * 2^16))` = 86.5%. On the other hand, if the 16-bit field is used as a randomly initialized counter, at least one collision occurs when the distance between two initial counter values is 256 or less, whose probability approximates to <del>`2 * 256 / 2^16`</del><ins>`(2 * 256 - 1) / 2^16`</ins> = 0.8%. The downsides of the counter, though, are that burst collisions will occur at the 0.8% probability and that adjacent IDs are almost perfectly predictable.

My gut feeling is like: with a large enough counter, the universal collision probability decreases because fewer dice rolls are necessary. A similar but extreme example might be UUIDv1's pseudorandom node, which requires only one roll of dice for the life of a generator. But I am not yet able to solve this problem mathematically. Can anyone help with this?

<ins>[Edit] Was double-counting the center.</ins>

Reviewer: @LiosK I think you're comparing apples and oranges here.  That 86% # is the odds of ~~a single~~ at least one collision in the case of 512 randomly selected values, while the 0.8% # is for a counter *spread* small enough to produce _at least_ one collision.  But small spreads will, on average, produce 128 collisions.  ~~If you normalize the # of collisions by the probability you get an average of 0.86 collisions per 512 UUIDs in the random case, and 1.02 collisions per 512 UUIDs in the counter case.~~ See edit, below.

Note, too, that you're not allowing for having to set the high counter bit to zero to mitigate the risk of rollover.  (But I believe you're also doubling the size of the spread needed to produce collisions, so I think your 0.8% number is overlapping spreads is actually correct. 😄 )

[Edit:  And... crap, I'm realizing the 86% # is for _at least_ one collision.  The actual # of collisions you should expect on average is... "more than that".   It's too late in the day for me to figure this out properly, though.]

Reviewer: Okay, math is too much work, but here's [a silly little script](https://codepen.io/broofa/pen/XWzEoxv?editors=0012) that hopefully produces some statistically significant results (n = 1,000).  Covers cases for each of 2, 8, or 32 nodes generating 64, 256, and 2048 uuids.  

Seems like the difference is negligible for small #'s, but increases significantly (in favor of random values) as the number of uuids & nodes increases.

```
Uuids: 64, nNodes: 2
  Collisions/run (random): 0.13
  Collisions/run (counter): 0.14

Uuids: 256, nNodes: 2
  Collisions/run (random): 2.00
  Collisions/run (counter): 3.46

Uuids: 2048, nNodes: 2
  Collisions/run (random): 124.97
  Collisions/run (counter): 216.52

Uuids: 64, nNodes: 8
  Collisions/run (random): 1.98
  Collisions/run (counter): 6.76

Uuids: 256, nNodes: 8
  Collisions/run (random): 31.80
  Collisions/run (counter): 114.05

Uuids: 2048, nNodes: 8
  Collisions/run (random): 1888.09
  Collisions/run (counter): 6786.38

Uuids: 64, nNodes: 32
  Collisions/run (random): 31.72
  Collisions/run (counter): 125.08

Uuids: 256, nNodes: 32
  Collisions/run (random): 490.88
  Collisions/run (counter): 1941.97

Uuids: 2048, nNodes: 32
  Collisions/run (random): 24110.70
  Collisions/run (counter): 121532.89
```

Reviewer 2: I found an interesting article about monotonic ULIDs. The author concluded that in his use case the monotonic ULIDs do not make collisions more likely. 

[How probable are collisions with ULID’s monotonic option?](https://medium.com/zendesk-engineering/how-probable-are-collisions-with-ulids-monotonic-option-d604d3ed2de)

Reviewer 4: @fabiolimace Awesome! That's exactly the kind of article I have been looking for. Will take a look.

@broofa Small experiments don't necessarily reveal the truth in this case. I did some experiments before and they suggested that counters provided much better collision resistance than randomness when the counter field size is sufficiently larger than the number of concurrent nodes. It depends several factors including the number of nodes, the average number of IDs per node, and the distribution and concentration of such numbers across nodes. And we have to deal with statistically rare circumstances; that's why we do need math here.

Plus, we need to be clear which measure is more relevant to the universal uniqueness: the expected number of collisions or the probability of at least one collision. The latter seems to me more important for the use cases of UUID, but to reach a conclusion we need to evaluate how serious or problematic are the burst collisions that may occur by use of counters.

Reviewer: > I found an interesting article about monotonic ULIDs.

Very interesting article. The math for when values are within a given range, _**k**_ , from one another is particularly insightful.  And I like how ULIDs treat the entire rand field as a monotonic counter.  'Makes a ton of sense.  However ... I believe the author has fallen afoul of the same mistake as @LiosK by not accounting for the # of collisions that occur when counters do end up overlapping.

For example, in the article's GO simulation ("Empirical Test" section) the `trial()` function exits immediately upon detecting a collision rather than counting how *many* collisions occur as IDs continue to be generated.  [Correcting for this](https://gist.github.com/broofa/d038e0ccbfa6f2c3cdcd415a17c37575) changes the behavior of the simulation significantly.

Running both the original version and my corrected version, I get the following results:

(Note: I ran w/ `TRIALS := 1000000` rather than `10000000` in both cases, so as to not have it take all day.  This increases the margin of error, but still shows the trends or lack thereof pretty clearly):

|Input | Original | Corrected |
|---|---|---|
| g=1 n=1000 k=0 p(n, k, d | 0.000127 | 0.000126 |
| g=1 n=1000 k=0 p(n, k, d | 0.000127 | 0.000126 |
| g=3 n=333 k=2 p(n, k, d | 7e-05 | 0.000106 |
| g=5 n=200 k=4 p(n, k, d | 5e-05 | 0.000133 |
| g=7 n=142 k=6 p(n, k, d | 3.7e-05 | 0.000079 |
| g=9 n=111 k=8 p(n, k, d | 3.3e-05 | 0.000146 |
| g=11 n=90 k=10 p(n, k, d | 1.6e-05 | 0.000109 |
| g=13 n=76 k=12 p(n, k, d | 1.8e-05 | 0.000117 |
| g=15 n=66 k=14 p(n, k, d | 1.8e-05 | 0.000135 |
| g=17 n=58 k=16 p(n, k, d | 1.3e-05 | 0.000132 |
| g=19 n=52 k=18 p(n, k, d | 1.4e-05 | 0.000104 |

  **I.e. Rather than the probability of collision decreasing as `k` increases, it stays more or less constant(!)**

Cc: @ggrossman You're the article author here, correct?  Would you care to comment?

> Small experiments don't necessarily reveal the truth in this case

Not necessarily, no.  But this isn't a valid reason for discounting such experiments, either.  And such experiments provide a concrete implementation that illustrates the assumptions authors may be making, as well as helping to identify trends that may be concerning as a system scales.  In that regard, I think they're both important and revealing.

For example, my "silly little script" experiment shows the trends in collisions between random vs. counter IDs as the number of nodes and uuids increases.  Is my model flawed?  Is there some reason to think these trends will reverse as the system scales?  Perhaps.  But if so, you and others have the code in front of you to throw darts at.

Reviewer 4: Hi @broofa, neither the author or I made a mistake. We are just interested in the probability of no collision. We are trying to figure out if we can reasonably assume no collision will occur. From this perspective, 99.999% chance of zero collision vs. 99.999999% chance of zero collision is a huge difference, whereas we are somewhat indifferent to the number of collisions that would actually occur on the disaster day.

The probability of no collision and the expected number of collisions are both important properties when it comes to the universal uniqueness. My gut feeling is that the former is more relevant to UUID use cases, but I would hear what others say.

> In that regard, I think they're both important and revealing.

That's the point. I did some experiments too and found out that the problem wouldn't be solved without math. Neither experiments or math can solely reveal the truth. In this sense, we do need to discount experiments as well as math.

Reviewer: @liosk: I vehemently disagree.

Your calculations aren't measuring id collision probability.  They're measuring id _group_ collision probability.

It's like me handing you a random ID generator and saying, "There's only a 0.0001% chance of collision."  But after using it for a few days, you discover that half your ids are duplicates.  "_WTF?!?_", you ask.

_"Oh, yeah, that's a known issue.  Entropy comes from a camera pointed at my pet hamster. When he's asleep it always outputs the same ID.  We only treat that as a single collision, though, because nobody cares about how *many* duplicates there are after the first one happens."_

Reviewer 4: @broofa, I'm afraid you are confusing probability with expected value. They are different from each other and both are important to describe a random ID generator. And the probability of at least one collision is a legit probability measure that a lot of applications will seek for. For example, if such probability is low enough, some developers might write code that simply ignores collisions, betting that no collision would occur. For such code, consecutive collisions after the first one do not make a lot of difference because the first single collision will have already broken the code. This is presumably the way UUIDv4 is handled in many real world applications as of now.

Reviewer 3: Great discussion!

I have always envisioned discussing the `counter` (a.k.a the old `clock sequence` verbiage I used pre-Draft 03) as part of the standard as it solves a very important problem that implementers will face with sortable time-based UUIDs.

---

In the [super old comparison documents from 16 months ago](https://github.com/uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft/tree/master/research) I discuss some legacy and current non-standard implementations counter positions.

To summarize this the known approaches to the counter:
1. **Dedicated Counter Bits**
    - These usually are at the end of the layout. (e.g last X number of bits.) 
    The problem here is that most of the layouts that implement this end counter do not utilize random data. in other words `timestamp|staticdata|counter`. 
    When introducing random data as the next component after the timestamp in order to sort properly; one must freeze the random per timestamp tick and start incrementing the counter. Alternative is item 2 (see next numbered bullet.)
    - For others that do support random, which is what we want for this spec, sorting works better when we utilize the components of `timestamp|counter|random` and place the counter immediately after the timestamp.
   Instead of freezing the random one can generate new random for each counter tick within the same timestamp tick.
   This increases collision resistance, reduces guessability and sorts better in implementation testing. 
        - Then gets us to the question of: "How many bits are enough for millisecond level counting" I have seen anywhere from 8 to 24 with millisecond precision. For Draft 02, millisecond precision of UUIDv7 it was deemed that 12 bits was likely more than adequate.
    - Cons for both methods: Less bits for random, dedicated bits for something a system that only generates the one-off UUID do not ever utilize properly. Possible guidance on that problem is to specify for those that don't expect to need a counter can just use this as more random bits.
    - Other notes: A random initialize of the counter per timestamp tick increases probability of counter rollover; thus as a group in some threads here on GitHub we discussed that counters should start at 0 to maximize the space.
2. **Monotonic Random**: The alternative I have seen, as used by a few implementations, is to incorporate the counter into the random data. That is, if the timestamp has not incremented, freeze the random and then increment it by +1. Continue until the timestamp moves forward and then generate a new random. This is similar to the first numbered item on this list but reduces dedicated bits and replaces them with random. There is no rollover issue but this does increase guessability and as we discussed above. "How much collision resistance do we have when we monotonically increment the random?" The document provided by @fabiolimace is one such example that this could totally be fine.

---

Now this does only include a single node generating UUIDs. For the purpose of distributed nodes, of course the probability of collision increases as we add nodes. However, the solution to this problem was one of two options:
1. **Shared Knowledge System**: All nodes consult a central repository and ensure their generated value is unique before inserting into the DB. The problem with this is that very large systems can run into a [bottleneck](https://instagram-engineering.com/sharding-ids-at-instagram-1cf5a71e5a5c). As such in Draft 01 we adopted the logic that shared knowledge systems are not something we have in mind for the document.
2. **Machine ID**: If distributed nodes are an absolute, one should dedicated a portion of the random data to a non-descript machine ID. This ensures the bitspace of the machine generating UUIDs does not conflict with any other machine generating UUIDs. This is something I detailed in [Draft 02](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-peabody-dispatch-new-uuid-format-02#section-7) and feel should be brought back into Draft 03.

---

In conclusion:
- I would like to include a writeup like this comment into the Draft 03 section, Monotonicity and Counters, which details both approaches to counters and what to do if an implementation does not want a counter.
   - My question for the group: is there any downside to letting an implementer choose any of these for their UUIDv7? i.e. no counter, explicit counter after timestamp (with some guidance on length), or monotonic random?
- Furthermore, I would like to modify Draft 03, Shared Knowledge, to include the text from Draft 02 on Distributed UUID Generation (possibly renaming the section to the draft 02 name as well)

Let me know what you think!

Reviewer 4: Thank you @kyzer-davis for the great summary!

### Counters

As an implementer of a general-purpose UUID library, I would default to the monotonic random approach if this doesn't do a lot of harm to the universal collision resistance. A monotonic random field acts just as an entropy field when a user needs one or less UUIDv7 per millisecond, while it can also serve those who need multiple sortable UUIDs per millisecond. My feeling is that a monotonic counter doesn't sacrifice collision resistance, and the article @fabiolimace referred to exemplified this, but I think we need some mathematical grounds to conclude.

As for the counter rollover, if a monotonic random field doesn't sacrifice collision resistance, we might be able to spare as many bits as possible to the monotonic random counter to lower the probability of counter overflow. I am currently leaning towards this approach. In the rare circumstances where the counter does overflow, in my opinion a generator can just stall and wait for the next millisecond, but we have some discussion over this in #51.

Yes, the monotonic random field does damage to unguessability. So I think it's a good idea to reserve some tail bits as a randomness field to guarantee a certain level of unguessability at the spec level. Unguessability itself does not ensure security nor should be the first priority of UUIDv7, so a relatively small number of bits (say, 16 or 32 bits) will suffice in my opinion.

### Shared knowledge and machine IDs

I think it's better to eliminate these concepts from UUIDv7 and have applications that need these use UUIDv8 instead. Shared knowledge and machine IDs are very application-specific and have adverse impact on the uniqueness across applications, but such characteristics will not suffer UUIDv8 because UUIDv8 is totally application-specific by design. They will be good friends😃 This approach clarifies the roles of UUIDv7 and UUIDv8. We can focus on the universal uniqueness with UUIDv7, and UUIDv8 will get more adoptions by applications that are keen on the local uniqueness.

Reviewer: @LiosK I'm continuing to ponder this.  I understand your point about how the characteristic of most interest to people is the likelihood of any sort of collision rather than the exact # of collisions.

But there's a fine line between "will there be collisions" and "how often will there be collisions".  As you scale the complexity of these use cases to include more nodes, with more ids, the "burstiness" of counter group collisions becomes less of a factor, and the # of ids involved in such collisions matters more.

Ultimately, it probably doesn't matter all that much.  The `rand_*` field should provide more than enough entropy to assuage people's concerns.  And if we take the ULID approach of treating that field as a randomly-seeded counter, then  I'm happy to continue using the birthday problem approach to collision probability calculations and ignore this issue altogether. :-)

Reviewer 3: I didn't have time to hit this topic today but I will commit some text changes tomorrow during my working session that the group here can review. 

Good point @LiosK, I can add steering guidance towards UUIDv8 for the topic of shared knowledge and machine ID.

Reviewer 4: BTW, I think we've missed @fabiolimace's point in [a separate comment](https://github.com/uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft/pull/58#issuecomment-1046315626): extra timestamp precision in `rand_a`. Such additional precision might be particularly useful in some use cases (e.g. sorting IDs generated by multiple threads on a single machine). For this to work, the extra precision has to be placed right after `unix_ts_ms` and before the counter. So, it might be best for the spec to specify the order of fields: `unix_ts_ms` -> optional (variable-length) extra timestamp precision -> optional (variable-length) counter -> required? randomness. Any combination of these, placed in this order, will meet the objective of universally time-ordered UUID.

The sub-millisecond fraction representation might be useful for such an additional precision field because this encoding can guarantee the sortability of timestamps with a variety of size. The fractional encoding seems to have puzzled so many people and could be too difficult to require as a standard, but that shouldn't be as big an issue if the encoding is used only by an optional field.

P.S. I am very concerned about zero-starting counters because this is very difficult to operate safely. Accurate estimate of the number of IDs generated per millisecond is necessary to determine an appropriate size of the counter, which is not feasible in most cases. I tried to implement a dynamically sized counter whose size is adjusted when counter overflows are frequently observed, but this feature doubled the lines of code of a UUIDv7 generator. I think this doesn't pay off.

Reviewer 2: @LiosK, I admit I was thinking generators on different machines, not different processes of a single machine. It guarantees some sort order on the same machine. Thank you! 

> the ULID approach of treating that field as a randomly-seeded counter

@broofa, this is exactly what a monotonic ULID is. It hits the bull's eye and is funny at the same time! hehe

Reviewer 3: ~I am not going to resolve the thread~ but I did commit the discussed changes on the topic of counters and distributed node generation. Please take a look at the latest Draft 03 text post [`kydavis-2-23-2022 commit`](https://github.com/uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft/pull/58/commits/600f55e28609f7cd1cbdeaa98dbec639ea087550) @broofa, @fabiolimace, and @LiosK

Edit: 
Remembered https://github.com/uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft/issues/41#issuecomment-907517063 exists.
I will ear-tag this for tomorrow to ensure "clock sequence vs counter' is detailed in the "Monotonicity and Counters" section

Reviewer 3: 1. I opened a discussion thread to continue this topic after this PR is closed. https://github.com/uuid6/uuid6-ietf-draft/issues/60
2. I put a few more layers into the monocity and counters section within this PR.

4.  Format

   The UUID format is 16 octets; some bits of the eight octet variant
   field specified below determine finer structure.

4.1.  Variant and Version Fields

   The variant bits utilized by UUIDs in this specification remain in
   the same octet as originally defined by [RFC4122], Section 4.1.1.

   For UUIDv6 the version and variant field placement from [RFC4122] are
   unchanged and a new version (0110b [6]) has been added.

   00000000-0000-6000-8000-000000000000
   00000000-0000-6000-9000-000000000000
   00000000-0000-6000-A000-000000000000
   00000000-0000-6000-B000-000000000000
   xxxxxxxx-xxxx-Mxxx-Nxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx

               Figure 1: UUIDv6 Version and Variant Examples

   M:  Version (0110b [6])

   N:  Variant (1000b [8], 1001b [9], 1010b [A] or 1011b [B]) are all
      valid values

   For UUID versions 7 and 8, the variant field has been incremented and

>    the version field has been moved to the same octet as the variant.

Reviewer: 'Guess I'll make a nuisance of myself by asking that we revert this `var_ver` field concept until #26 has been resolved.

As I said, I feel it's incumbent upon @bradleypeabody to make a better case for why a new variant is needed, so I'd prefer it if we didn't just default to this in the event that conversation peters out.

   well as improved entropy characteristics over versions 1 or 6.
   Implementations SHOULD utilize UUID version 7 over UUID version 1 and
   6 if possible.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 28 August 2022                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                           unix_ts_ms                          |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |      unix_ts_ms       |                  rand_a               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    var_ver    |            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                   Figure 4: UUIDv7 Field and Bit Layout

   unix_ts_ms:

>       44 bit big-endian unsigned number of unix epoch timestamp as per

Reviewer 2: is '44' a typo? other places in this document say it's 48.

Reviewer 3: Silly me, missed these references.

This is why we peer review!

      Section 5.1

   rand_a:

>       20 bits pseudo-random data to provide uniqueness as per

Reviewer 2: if '44' is a type, '20' here is a typo too.

   given implementation.  That being said, various relevant factors are
   covered below to help guide an implementer through the different
   trade-offs among differing UUID implementations.

5.1.  Timestamp Granularity

   UUID timestamp source, precision and length was the topic of great
   debate while creating this specification.  As such choosing the right
   timestamp for your application is a very important topic.  This
   section will detail some of the most common points on this topic.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 29 August 2022                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   Reliability:
      Implementations SHOULD use the current timestamp from a reliable
      source to provide values that are time-ordered and continually
      increasing.  Care SHOULD be taken to ensure the timestamp does not
      move backwards which will impact UUID sorting.

   Source:
      UUID version 1 and 6 both utilize a Gregorian epoch timestamp
      while UUIDv7 utilizes a Unix Epoch timestamp.  If other timestamp
      sources or a custom timestamp epoch are required UUIDv8 SHOULD be
      leveraged.

>    Sub-second Precision and Accuracy):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Sub-second Precision and Accuracy:
```
Typo?

      Many levels of precision exist for timestamps: milliseconds,

>       microseconds, nanoseconds, and beyond.  Additionally fractional
>       representations of sub-second precision may be desired to create
>       more exotic timestamps.  With UUID version 1 and 6,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      microseconds, nanoseconds, and beyond.  Additionally fractional
      representations of sub-second precision may be desired to mix
      various levels of precision in a time-ordered manner.  With UUID version 1 and 6,
```
Fractional representations help inter-operate multiple timestamp precisions. Exotic precision is one efficient mean for that end.

   local application context are unique within a database MAY be
   sufficient for some implementations where global uniqueness outside
   of the application context, in other applications, or around the
   world is not required.

   Although true global uniqueness is impossible to guarantee without
   shared knowledge scheme; a shared knowledge scheme is not required by
   UUID to provide uniqueness guarantees.  Implementations MAY implement
   a shared knowledge scheme introduced in Section 5.3 as they see fit
   to extend the uniqueness guaranteed this specification and [RFC4122].

5.6.  Unguessability

   Implementations SHOULD utilize a cryptographically secure pseudo-
   random number generator (CSPRNG) to provide values that are both
   difficult to predict ("unguessable") and have a low likelihood of
   collision ("unique").  CSPRNG ensures the best of Section 5.4 and
   Section 7 are present in modern UUIDs.

5.7.  Sorting

   UUIDv6 and UUIDv7 are designed so that implementations that require
   sorting (e.g. database indexes) SHOULD sort as opaque raw bytes,
   without examining the contents at all.

>    Time ordered monotonic UUIDs benefit from grater index locality

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Time ordered monotonic UUIDs benefit from greater index locality
```
Typo?

   because the new values are near each other in the index.  As a result
   objects can much more easily be clustered together for better
   performance.  The real-world differences in this approach of index
   locality vs random data inserts can be quite large.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 29 August 2022                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

> 5.8.  Text Format

Reviewer 4: This section can be omitted if nothing is changed. Or, alternatively, we might be able to discuss some considerations in choosing an application-specific textual encoding. For example:

- 8-4-4-4-12 is <ins>generally</ins> not _double-click-safe_
- Base 32 is case-insensitive and easy to implement
- Base 62 (like [KSUID](https://github.com/segmentio/ksuid)) is compact if complex to implement
- Choose alphabets wisely to ensure sort order; simply following [RFC 4648 base64](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#section-4) does not work
- bla bla bla

I don't like to specify a new canonical textual format in this RFC, but I know textual representation is definitely of great concern to many users of UUID and many users have departed from the 8-4-4-4-12 canonical format. Inclusion of this kind of discussion should be valuable, and should be possible because this section is the _best practices_ section.

Reviewer: > * 8-4-4-4-12 is not _double-click-safe_

FWIW, this is arguably just a tooling problem.  For example, in iTerm2:

![CleanShot 2022-02-26 at 07 32 13](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/164050/155848958-e3fd8b1c-399e-4ca0-a35d-8478b741c83a.gif)

(But, yes, generally speaking it's a nuisance.)

Reviewer 4: Wow amazing!

   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    var_ver    |            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                            rand_b                             |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                   Figure 4: UUIDv7 Field and Bit Layout

   unix_ts_ms:
      44 bit big-endian unsigned number of milliseconds since midnight 1
      January 1970 UTC.  Follows the same rules as a UNIX timestamp,
      i.e. does not include leap seconds.

   rand_a:
      20 bits pseudo-random data to provide uniqueness as per
      Section 5.8

   var_ver:
      The 8 bit combined variant and version field with the value 0xE7
      as defined by Section 4.1.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 26 August 2022                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   rand_b:
      The final 56 bits of pseudo-random data to provide uniqueness as
      per Section 5.8 and Section 5.5.

4.4.  UUID Version 8

   UUID version 8 provides an RFC-compatible format for experimental or

>    vendor-specific use cases involving time-based UUIDs.  The only

Reviewer: Is there a specific reason for restricting this to timestamp-specific cases?

I see v8 as the "do whatever you want with it" sandbox.

```suggestion
   vendor-specific use cases.  The only
```

   requirement is that the variant and version bits MUST be set as
   defined in Section 4.1.  UUIDv8's uniqueness will be implementation-
   specific and should not be assumed.

   UUIDv8 SHOULD only be utilized if an implementation cannot utilize
   UUIDv1, UUIDv6, or UUIDv7.

   Some situations in which UUIDv8 usage could occur:

   *  An implementation would like to utilize a timestamp source not
      defined by the current time-based UUIDs.

   *  An implementation would like to utilize a timestamp bit layout not
      defined by the current time-based UUIDs.

   *  An implementation would like a specific level of precision within
      the timestamp not offered by current time-based UUIDs.

   *  An implementation would like to embed extra information within the
      UUID other than what is defined in this document.

>    *  An implementation has other application/language restrictions
>       which inhibit the usage of one of the current time-based UUIDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *  An implementation has other application/language restrictions
      which inhibit the use of existing UUID versions.
```

   Implementations MAY implement more complex sorting rules for UUID
   versions 1 through 5 (or strictly speaking they MAY do this for any
   version, but shouldn't need to).

   One of the big benefits of time ordering is "index locality" - new
   values are near each other in the index and can much more easily be
   clustered together for better performance.  Real-world differences vs
   random data can be quite large.

5.4.  Timestamp Granularity

   Implementations SHOULD use the current timestamp to provide values
   that are time-ordered and continually increasing.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 26 August 2022                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   It's okay to "fuzz" timestamp values here for various reasons
   (security, clock inaccuracy, etc.), there is no absolute guarantee
   about how close the clock value needs to be to actual time - that's
   implementation-specific.

5.5.  Monotonicity and Counters

   (the old clock seq, can be optionally implemented, doesn't help that
   much in distributed environment)

   Within UUIDv7 it can be said that "each value returned is greater

>    than the last" due to the embedded counter.

Reviewer: What "embedded counter"?  (This isn't defined elsewhere).

>    Implementations SHOULD return monotonic values where it is feasible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Implementations SHOULD return monotonic values where feasible.
```

   max limit for cases where the system clock rolls back).

   The monotonicity properties of an particular UUID generator SHOULD
   stated in it's documentation.

5.6.  Global and Local Uniqueness

   Global uniqueness is impossible to guarantee without shared
   knowledge.  I.e. two systems cannot come up with two numbers
   completely independently without some possibility of collision UNLESS
   they agree on some mechanism to ensure uniqueness ahead of time (e.g.
   your numbers always end with ... and mine always end with... or
   whatever)

   RFC4122 tried to use MAC address as shared knowledge - it sort of
   worked but had problems (security issues with exposing MAC addresses
   defined in Section 7, guarantee of actual global uniqueness is
   questionable)

Peabody & Davis          Expires 26 August 2022                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   A shared knowledge scheme is not required by the UUID to provide
   uniqueness guarantees.  Implementations MAY implement a shared
   knowledge scheme as they see fit to extend the uniqueness guaranteed

>    by this UUIDs in this specification and [RFC4122].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   in this specification and [RFC4122].
```

   So instead just decide if you need 100% guarantee of uniqueness.  If

>    so, implement shared knowledge approach (see section below)

Reviewer: lines preceding and following this are a bit too informal.  Basically search for uses of "you", "your", "we" or "our" and reword.

   total        128
   -------------------------------
   final: 17F21CFD-1307-E9D1-E7D6-A139DC9535C5

                   Figure 11: UUIDv7 Example Test Vector

B.3.  Example of a UUIDv8 Value

   This example UUIDv8 test vector utilizes a well-known 64-bit unix
   epoch with nanosecond precision to fill the first 64 bits through
   ver_var.

   The final 56 bits are filled with random data.

Peabody & Davis          Expires 26 August 2022                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft               new-uuid-format               February 2022

   Timestamp is Tuesday, February 22, 2022 2:22:22.000000 PM GMT-05:00
   represented as 0x16D6320C3D4DCC00 or 1645557742000000000

   It should be noted that this example is just to illustrate one
   scenario for UUIDv8.  Test vectors will likely be implementation
   specific and vary greatly from this simple example.

   -------------------------------
   field      bits    value
   -------------------------------
   custom_a     64    0x16D6320C3D4DCC00
   var_ver       8    0xE7
   custom_b     56    0x3C2D06302FC417
   -------------------------------
   total        128
   -------------------------------

>    final: 16D6320C-3D4D-CC00-E73C-2D06302FC417

Reviewer 2: Typos on lines 1304 and 1309: E7.
